# Description of Supplemental Materials  
Supplemental materials for Bryant, DeMarco, and Hallem (2021).  

## Supplemental Files  
File S1 contains Metadata tables for the four *Strongyloides* species data included in the *Strongyloides* RNA-seq Browser. For all species, metadata information was retrieved from the European Nucleotide Archive. For *Strongyloides stercoralis*, additional protocol information was retrieved from ArrayExpress.  

File S2 contains low-count genes and associated log2CPM values discarded during preprocessing.  

File S3 contains a list of the top 10% of genes contributing to PC1 and PC2 identity for each species. Genes were extracted based on PCA variable scores using tidyverse package version 1.3.0.  

File S3 contains a code freeze of the *Strongyloides* RNA-seq Browser.  

File S5 is an example .xlsx results file generated by the *Strongyloides* RNA-seq Browser containing the top 10% of upregulated and downregulated S. stercoralis genes in the iL3 versus free-living female life stages.  

File S6 is an output table with results of GSEA analysis of differentially expressed genes in S. stercoralis iL3s versus free-living females.  

File S7 contains a list of chemoreceptor gene IDs for all Strongyloides species (Langeland et al., 2020).  

File S8 is an example .xlsx results file generated by the *Strongyloides* RNA-seq Browser containing a differential gene expression table listing 64 *S. stercoralis* chemoreceptors that are consistently upregulated in iL3s versus all other life stages.  

## MultiQC Reports
Reports summarizing quality controls for raw data and Kallisto alignments. Generated using FastQC v0.11.9 and MultiQC v1.9.

## Supplemental Figures
For descriptions of supplemental figures see figure legends included in each PDF document.  

